I almost hate to talk about Maze of Life because it was such an interesting problem and my solution had potential but regrettably did not scale to multiple threads. Part of my difficulty stemmed from getting a late start on the contest and only having 9 days to complete Maze of Life. Working the full 21 days really helps on any problem.

My top level design is analagous to a chess-playing program in that you need three things:
1. A compact representation of board positions;
2. A way to quickly generate new positions; and
3. A payoff function to evaluate the quality of a postion.

To address the first two requirements I turned to the substantial body of literature on Game of Life programs. My data structure is "sparse" in that it only represents regions that contain living cells. Each cell is represented by a bit (0 = dead, 1 = alive) in a 64 bit integer which, in turn, covers a horizontal run of 64 cells. Advancing one generation in the Game of Life uses bitwise operations to process 64 cells in parallel.

Now that I know more about SSE, I could probably up the word size to 128 and get 128-way parallelism. It wouldn't have mattered much for this contest because 80% of the problem grids were smaller than 64 in width.

The payoff function is interesting because it can totally change the complexion of the program. It scores each position based on how likely it is to lead to the desired solution - lower numbers being better. I wrote two payoffs, greedy and optimal:

- Greedy returns the approximate Manhattan distance from the intelligent cell to the goal. It actually weights the major axis of the Manhattan distance so heavily that the minor axis is only used to break ties.
- Optimal is like the A* algorithm. It returns the distance already traveled plus the best case number of remaining steps. This is an optimistic estimate of the length of a path through this position.

The main algorithm uses a priority queue of positions, sorted by payoff, to work on the most promising leads first:

    push initial position onto the heap
    while position at top of heap is not at the goal
	pop position p from the heap
	for direction d in 0 to 8
	    if p + d is in bounds and p[d] is a free cell
		position n = p with intelligent cell moved in direction d
		advance n to next generation
		if the intelligent cell survived
		    push n onto the heap
	delete p
    report the solution

That's my basic single-threaded solution. With the greedy payoff function it finds sub-optimal solutions quickly. With the optimal payoff, it always finds the shortest path but can take a long time depending on the complexity of the problem.

All attempts to multithread this thing only made it slower. The more threads I started the slower it ran, regardless of threading strategy. Now that I look at it, the problem may have been that each iteration of the loop allocated several new positions and only deleted one. It was constantly growing in terms of dynamic memory, and those newly allocated positions had to be loaded into the data cache. Hmm.

My first attempt at multi-threading simply protected the heap with a mutex and turned all the threads loose on the main loop. When that failed, I assumed it was due to contention for the mutex.

After a series of other failures, I found a paper on Parallel Best NBlock First by Ethan Burns et al. PBNF is a clever algorithm that can be appliesd to Maze of Life. I won't cover the whole thing but recommend reading the paper(s).
http://www.jair.org/papers/paper3094.html
http://www.cs.unh.edu/~eaburns/

The basic idea is that the game grid is divided into equal-sized rectangular zones (typically squares), say of size 8x8 cells. Each thread stakes out a zone and only processes positions where the intelligent cell is in its own zone. The active zones are spaced sufficiently far apart so that if the intelligent cell moves out of one thread's zone, it will enter a passive zone (i.e. one not currently being processed by a thread). This precludes the need for mutexes on most data structures. Periodically each thread checks to see if there is a more promising zone that it should be working on.

This was the solution that I submitted, using the greedy payoff function as its heuristic. It still didn't speed up with threads but this is the Threading Challenge. It wouldn't be in the spirit of the competition to submit a single-threaded solution.
